# Supplementary Materials

## HT assays

To provide a concrete example, consider a high throughput assay measuring the drug resistance value of a family of protein variants relative to a standardized control. In a 96-well format experiment, a researcher would at the minimum have to include a "blank" well and one well for the reference control. Traditionally, the plate is set up such that each mutant (including the blank and reference) is measured in triplicate on one plate; this captures biological variation within a single plate. In a puzzling move, the data are normalized by subtracting the mean of the blanks' values from every well (by definition resulting in at least one negatively-valued blanks well if there is variation in the measured blanks). The mean of each triplicate sample is then divided by the mean of the references, thereby making the assumption that the reference sample is properly measured. This forms the fold change calculation for one plate, apparently controlling for biological variation.

This procedure is replicated two more times, and the mean and variance of the three fold changes calculated are taken to be the data to be published. This two-step calculation procedure is supposed to account for biological and technical variation hierarchically, but much data are lost in averaging the computed means from triplicate measurements in one plate. In an even more puzzling move, some researchers choose to pool all 9 measurements together after 'eyeballing' the data to determine that the values are roughly the same, discarding altogether the need to reference for technical variation resulting from batch effects.
